# Home-and-Industrial-Safety-Using-Fire-and-Gas-Detection-System
1.1. Background 
Nowadays, securing one’s property and business against fire is becoming more and more important. Monitoring commercial and residential areas all-round is an effective method to reduce personal and property losses due to fire disaster. Home fire detection is a matter of great concern, and thus many efforts are devoted in most developed countries to the design of automatic detection systems. A fire alarm system should reliably and in a timely way notify building occupants about the presence of fire indicators, such as smoke or high temperatures. A fire detector is usually implemented as a smoke sensor due to its early fire detection capability, fast response time and relatively low cost. Other options for the fire detection are based on gas sensors or temperature sensors fire detectors that use a single sensor, generally a smoke sensor, and present high false-alarm rates due to temperature changes. In order to prevent fires from occurring or minimize their impact, accurate and early detection is essential, and automatic fire detection is becoming very essential to reduce the fire in the building and industry. Automatic fire alarm system provides real-time surveillance and monitoring. A key aspect of fire protection is to identify a developing fire emergency in a timely manner, and to alert the building's occupants and fire emergency organizations. This is the role of fire detection and alarm systems. Generally, fire detectors are designed to respond at an early stage to one more of the four major characteristics of combustion, heat, smoke, flame or gas. No single type of detector is suitable for all types of premises or fires. Heat detectors respond to the temperature rise associated with a fire and smoke detector respond to the smoke or gas generated due to fire.
1.2. Description of the project 
    This system is a kind of stand-alone embedded system. It is a self-contained device. It takes either                  digital or Analog inputs from its input ports, calibrates, converts, and processes the data, and outputs the resulting data to its attached output device, which either displays data, or controls and drives the attached devices. These devices could be for example, Global System for Mobile Communication (GSM) and short message service (SMS) to carry out data from the building with sensors directly alert the owners to their mobile phone. Therefore, this makes controlling damages caused by fire easier by directly sending alert notification messages to owners or fire department using GSM technology. So, we designed a smart fire alarm model. Parameters like, temperature and smoke level will be controlled by microcontroller. Each of these parameters is measured by a sensor that is set at a specific range, if this sensor signals any change in that range, the system will take the appropriate action required, and the system sends a daily report to the user by SMS.
to their mobile phone. Therefore, this makes controlling damages caused by fire easier by directly sending alert notification messages to owners or fire department using GSM technology. So, we designed a smart fire alarm model. Parameters like, temperature and smoke level will be controlled by microcontroller. Each of these parameters is measured by a sensor that is set at a specific range, if this sensor signals any change in that range, the system will take the appropriate action required, and the system sends a daily report to the user by SMS.
1.3. Statement of the Problem
            The most prevalent threat faced by all institutions is FIRE. No institution is immune from fire. Until the owners/trustees of these institutions develop plans for dealing with the fire threat, they place the building and its occupants and collections at risk.
            The complexity of these plans may vary from a simple evacuation plan, to a fire prevention program, to a more complex plan that includes passive and automatic fire protection systems almost 90% of fire damages occur due to lack of early fire detection. A fire attack is usually silent and people will know about fire only when it has spread across a large area. SMS based Fire Alert system gives warning immediately to one or more mobile numbers and hence remedy actions can be taken quickly. This helps to prevent major damages and losses created by a fire accident.
             In Ethiopia the hazard of fire and related problem is occur frequently in the urban area of the country. There for existing fire alarm system in market nowadays, is too complex in term of its design and structure. Since the system is too complex, it needs regular preventive maintenance to be carried out to make sure the system operates well. Meanwhile, when the maintenance is been done to the existing system, it could raise the cost of using the system. Therefore, the project is designed with a low cost and all level users can have one for a safety purpose.
                   Property damaged by floods can often be dried out and restored. Structural damage from an earthquake might be repaired. Stolen property always has a chance of being recovered. Damage from fire, however, is usually permanent and irreparable. Historical buildings or contents, once reduced to ash, can never be restored. Fire is more cunning and less discriminating than a thief. It can travel (spread) through very small openings and concealed spaces to reach other parts of a building, deprive occupants of a life supporting environment, and cause partial to total destruction of property.
1.4 Objective of the project
       1.4.1 General objective 
The main purpose of this project is to design and implement an automatic fire and smoke detection that can be produced at a low cost with effective and competitive usage. This System is designed to be more users friendly and easy to operate at any level.
     1.4.2 Specific objective
The project is also been designed to be further working vision using minimum hardware at the lower level of processing. These systems are directed at specific applications. Our objective is to design a fire and smoke detection that would fulfill the following:
	To prevent fire and smoke
	To sound the alarm if fire and smoke detection occurs.
	To indicate the state of the room as ‘Safe’ in order to avoid any confusion under normal condition. So the system should never be in any ambiguous state.
